---
layout: post
title: "Similarity Methods"
date: 2024-03-23
mathjax: true
---

The key technique for modeling sequence relationships in computational biology is alignment. Given a database of proteins and a new protein at test-time, an alignment-based method uses either carefully designed scoring systems to perform pairwise comparisons, Hidden Markov Model-like probabilistic models, or a combination to align the test protein

- BLAST: BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) is a fast heuristic algorithm that seeks local alignments between a given sequence and a database of existing sequences (proteins, DNA, etc.). It first identifies high-scoring sequence pairs by looking for matches between short word-length sequences. The algorithm then uses these matches as seeds to find longer alignments without examining every possible alignment in detail. This approach allows BLAST to efficiently process large sequence databases by focusing on the most promising match regions. BLAST aims to maximize the alignment score, which is calculated based on a scoring system that assigns positive scores for matches and negative scores for mismatches and gaps.

- Hidden Markov Models: Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are used in sequence analysis by modeling the statistical properties of families of biological sequences. They help compare a query sequence to a database by evaluating how well the sequence fits the statistical model of each sequence family in the database. This is achieved by calculating the likelihood that the query sequence could be generated by the HMMs representing each family, allowing for the identification of the most similar sequences or sequence families based on statistical significance. Compared to pairwise sequence comparison methods like BLAST, HMM-based approaches are more sensitive at detecting remote homologs that share only weak sequence similarity. This is because the HMM considers the overall sequence profile rather than just pairwise residue matches.

- FASTA: 







