---
layout: post
title: "Binder design strategies: insights from the Adaptyv challenge"
date: 2025-04-07
mathjax: true
---

EDIT: There is a much better [paper on Bioarxiv](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.04.17.648362v2) that summarizes the competition. 

This note is a summary of a binder design competition hosted by Adaptyv Bio. Adaptyv is a company located in Switzerland that bills itself as a wetlab partner to computational biology clients, i.e. it performs in-vitro testing of in-silico designs. Convenient for computational-only biotech firms! It is useful to analyze the format and metrics used in this competition as well the results because it tells us what approaches were useful for a typical design problem. T

**Competition Goal**

The goal of this competition was to design novel single-chain proteins that bind the extracellular domain of EGFR (Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor), a critical therapeutic target in cancer. Designs had to be at least 10 amino acids different from any known therapeutic antibodies. Entries (up to 10 per designer) were ranked using three computational metrics:


**Design approaches**

The most interesting part of this competition is analyzing the design approaches taken by the participants. Designing a binder for EGFR is not a toy problem -- it has infact been targetted by the South Korean AI company Galux using a _de novo_ approach, because EGFR is found exclusively on the surface of some cancer cells and not on other ambient proteins in the human body. The key tools in the design process are: a backbone generative model like RFDiffusion that can generate candidate structures conditioned on the taret geometry, a structure-to-sequence model like ProteinMPNN that generates candidate seuqences given a structure, and AlphaFold for its ability to recapitulate sequences proposed by ProteinMPNN to structure to see if they match the starting structure, as well as for AlphaFold's confidence metrics like pLDDT and iPTM explained above. In addition to these 3 tools, protein language models also play a role because they can serve as likelihood-scorers, i.e. given a sequence, they can generate a likelihood score that tells us (as per the model) whether the sequence is plausible or not. 

The main design strategies used in the competition can broadly be categorized into:

- **De novo + filter** De novo generation means not starting with any known binder but rather computationally generating a protein from scratch using only the target geometry. This could be done using say e.g., RFdiffusion backbone synthesis, possibly conditioned on the target geometry. De novo generation is typically followed by a _filter_ that would only keep some of the designs, and this filter typically consists of: (i) an inverse folding stage like ProteinMPNN that takes 3d structures generated by RFDiffusion and produces candidate sequences (typically > 1 sequence per structure), and then (ii) using AlphaFold's predicted metrics to decide whether a given sequence + structure is 'good'. De novo design is kind of like a holy grail but it remains difficult because of a low _hit rate_ -- i.e. most designs do not actually bind or do not have other desirable properties. The filtering stage is therefore crucial - and even after that the remaining designs might not work _in vitro_. Why is single-shot _de novo_ design is not there yet? Multiple reasons: (a) the full realities of what we need in a design molecule are not yet part of the generative models - we want specific geometry to attach to a binder, but also specificity, i.e. we dont want the designed molecule to attach to other biomolecules in the body that might disrupt other processes, we generally want solubility (i.e. 'good' interations with the water molecule), we want non toxicity, etc. (b) there are gaps and biases in biological training data used to train the generative models.

- **Diversification of existing binders + filtering by metrics** start with known binders from literature, and mutate them, and then use AlphaFold metrics to decide whether the new protein is 'good' (stable, etc.). At first I wondered why anyone would want to design a binder for a target for which there is already a known binder. For e.g. [Cetuximab](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cetuximab) is an approved drug that is a type of binder for EGFR. I assumed that the rationale for modifying a known binder would be to get patent rights by arguing that a new molecule has been created that is sufficiently different. However, it turns out that just because a binder exists does not mean that it is the best binder. In this very competition the winning team ([cradle](cradle.bio)) started with Cetuximab and after a number of modifications, managed to improve binding affinity by a factor of 8.2x!

- **Hallucination via AlphaFold2 optimization**: Start from a random or partially defined sequence. Iteratively optimize the sequence so that AF2 predicts a folded structure with the desired binding interface. This “hallucinates” sequences that AF2 consistently interprets as structured binders.

- **Unsupervised protein language model–guided optimization** (e.g., active learning): PLMs score or propose mutations that are “natural-like” (likely to fold, stable). Combine with active learning: iteratively generate sequences, evaluate them (in silico or experimentally), and retrain the scoring function to bias towards better candidates.

- **Physics-based docking and molecular dynamics**, often followed by score filtering

I think an interesting problem in this space is how to systematize and unify these (and possibly other) approaches under an umbrella, so that it becomes clear what one should pursue for maximum / fast impact == being able to design good candidates with high hit rate, with high likelihood of success in the lab. Another area is to improve the state of de novo design - such that it can work in a single-shot, i.e. without using any existing designs, or at least improve the hit rate of candidates produces by de novo design. 


Winner: Cradle — Optimization of Existing Binder. A variant of Cetuximab with 10 stabilizing framework mutations (not in the binding CDR loops). Achieved KD = 1.21 nM -- 8x better than a Cetuximab scFv (~9.9 nM), and 4x better than the nearest competitor (~5.2 nM). The cradle.bio group has a blog post about their winning entry here: https://www.cradle.bio/blog/adaptyv-protein-design-competition




