---
layout: page
title: Glossary
includelink: true
---

A growing list of terms from biology, chemistry, bioinformatics and medicine, useful for navigating the space. 

- **Amyloid**:  (see also 'Misfolding diseases' below). An "amyloid" refers to aggregates of proteins that have folded into a structurally abnormal form, characterized by a fibrillar, beta-sheet-rich structure. These amyloid fibrils are typically insoluble and can form deposits in tissues, which are associated with a variety of diseases, collectively known as amyloidosis. Amyloid fibrils are notable for their ability to increase in size by recruiting and converting more of the normal, soluble form of the protein into the misfolded amyloid form. Amyloidosis, i.e. dieases caused by amyloid fibril formation, are a subset of protein misfolding diseases. 

- **Antibody**: A macro molecule, usually a protein, that is meant to bind to an antigen. The binding is enabled by a close match between the shape of the antigen and a complementary geometric 3D shape in the antibody. Antibodies are produced by the human body naturally (via B-cells, see below), but some drugs are also based on (externally created) antibodies. 

- **Antigen**: A general term for a foreign body that the body deems to be an invader that must be attacked / neutralized. Antigens can be macromolecules like proteins, or something else - for e.g. people with pollen allergies have immune systems that believe that pollen is an antigen that is then attacked. 

- **Assay**: An assay is a general term to denote a wetlab procedure in molecular biology, chemistry, or medicine that is used to test or measure the presence, amount, or activity of a target entity (such as a drug, a biochemical substance, or a cell). Assays are crucial tools in scientific research, diagnostic testing, and drug development. They enable researchers and clinicians to evaluate the effects of specific compounds, diagnose diseases, and measure the progress of biological processes. Broadly, there are 4 types of asseys: quantitative, qualitative, functional and binding. As the names suggest, they are used to (respectively): test the amount of a substance present in a sample, test whether a given substance is present in a sample or not, test biological activity in a sample, and test for interaction between two molecules e.g. a ligand and receptor. Performing these assays can make use of any of a range of possible _techniques_ or instruments - some common ones are: spectrophotometry, flurometry, luminiscence, radioactivity, and chromatography. 

- **B cell**: A type of cell in the human immune system, that is produced in bone marrow. B cells are responsible for producing antibodies that are specific to the gemoetry of an antigen found by the immune system in the body. Each new B cell has about 10^5 copies of a specific type of random geometric antibody sticking out from its surface. This antibody is capable of sticking to antigens with certain geometries but not others. When a given B cell's antibodies bind to an antigen, this causes the B cell to divide an produce copies of itself: but two different types of copies are created -- namely, more B-cells with the same type of antibody sticking out on its surface, and B cells that are capable of secreting the same antibody. This is the process by which the body produces antibodies specific to a newly recognized antigen in the body, capable of binding to the antigen.    

- **Backbone Generation**: The process of generating a plausible 3D structure of a protein’s backbone atoms (N, Cα, C, O), typically as a step before sequence design or structural validation.

- **Binder**: A binder is a protein (or molecule) that is specifically designed to bind tightly to a target molecule — often another protein. Think of it like a key made to fit a specific lock. In protein design: The binder is the newly designed protein. The target is often a disease-associated protein, like a viral spike or a cancer receptor. The goal is for the binder to stick to the target very tightly and very specifically, interfering with its function or flagging it for destruction.


- **BLAST**: BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) is a fast heuristic algorithm that seeks local alignments between a given sequence and a database of existing sequences (proteins, DNA, etc.). It first identifies high-scoring sequence pairs by looking for matches between short word-length sequences. The algorithm then uses these matches as seeds to find longer alignments without examining every possible alignment in detail. This approach allows BLAST to efficiently process large sequence databases by focusing on the most promising match regions. BLAST aims to maximize the alignment score, which is calculated based on a scoring system that assigns positive scores for matches and negative scores for mismatches and gaps.

- **Cancer**: A class of diseases with some common factors, in particular uncontrolled cell growth. 

- **Catalytic Triad**: A set of 3 amino acids (usually Serine, Histidine, Aspartate) arranged in a specific geometry in enzymes. They are part of a single protein, that may be far awart in the sequence but are brought close together by the protein's specific folding and the geometry they create catalyzes a chemical reaction — often hydrolysis of peptide bonds,i.e. breaking peptide bonds (e.g., in serine proteases like trypsin). The geometry is crucial: each side chain must be positioned precisely in 3D space. During design, a common goal is to want to embed this triad in a new protein to create an artificial enzyme. This means: create a new protein that will in its 3D shape have this triad in a stable way and will therefore posess the catalytic functional property of the triad. 


- **Cell**: A basic unit of life. Discovered by Robert Hooke and Vanderleuven using a microsope in the 1600s. Human beings have about a million-billion cells, i.e. about 10^15 cells. The simplest life forms have a single cell, e.g. amoeba. Not all life forms have cells though  -- this gets messy because its hard to agree on a definition of 'life' -- for e.g. viruses. 

- **Central Dogma**: The idea that information flows in one direction: DNA --> RNA --> Proteins. First coined and proposed by Francis Crick in 1958. Several exceptions to the theory have sine been discovered. On particularly notable example is that of prions. Prions are infectious proteins which replicate without going through DNA or RNA intermediates. 

- **Competetive binding**: The binding of a molecule A to B is said to be competetive if another molecule C is also seeking to bind to B, and the binding of A to B reduces the amount of C that can bind to B. A good example is the CHolstrol drug Lipitor, which works by binding to an enzyme known as HMG-CoA-Reductase that is involved in the pathway of Cholestrol Production. The binding of Lipitor to HMG-CoA reductase is competitive, meaning that the drug competes with the natural substrate (HMG-CoA) for binding to the active site of the enzyme. By occupying this site, Lipitor effectively inhibits the enzyme's activity, leading to a decrease in cholesterol synthesis.

- **CRISPR**: A technology to selectively edit the DNA of lving organisms. CRISPR stands for “clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats”. Given that DNA encodes instructions to make proteins and that DNA can sometimes mutate to incorrect states where the intende prteins are not produced, once can see what CRISPR is such a useful tool. 

- **Cross-Attention Mechanisms**: Neural network components that allow one set of elements (e.g., a generated protein backbone) to attend to another (e.g., a target surface) — enabling conditioning on external inputs like motifs or targets.

- **de novo slot machine**: a tongue in cheek nickname for a specific approach to protein design for a problem like binder design: use a generative model like RFDiffusion possibly conditioned on the target to generate several candidate structures, for each find several protein sequences via ProteinMPNN, and then convert them back to structures ysing AlphaFold to filter out the ones with poor consistency. Treat the remaining ones as good candidates for wetlab screening. 


- **Designability (proteins)**: A structure is “designable” if there exists at least one amino acid sequence that reliably folds into it. A computationally generated protein structure is said to be designable if it has 'good' self-consistency scores in a recapitulation process. That is, (1) the designed protein structure is first used to produce a correspodning sequence (typically using ProteinMPNN), (2) then that sequence is used to predict a structure (typically using either ESMFold or AlphaFold2), and finally (3) the predicted structure from 2 and the initial structure are compared for geometric similarity using RMSD and TM score (which are typically called scRMSD and scTM respectively where 'sc' stands for self-consistency). The initial structure is said to be designable if: scRMSD on alpha-Carbons is < 2 Angstroms. 

- **Differentiation**: The process by which B-cells in the human immune system divide into two different types of cells, namely plasma cells (which only produce antibodies that are secreted, sometimes at a very high rate, and then these cells die without further growth or division), and other B-cells that express antibody proteins of the same type at their membrane/surface. 

- **DNA**: Deoxy Ribonucleic Acid is a very long sequence of nucleotide base-pairs (A, G, T, C) structured as a double helix. It is located inside the nucleus of the cell. 

- **Dominant**: The opposite of receissive (see 'recessive' below) in genetic terms is dominant.  A dominant gene is one where only one copy of the gene is required for the trait it encodes to be expressed in an individual's phenotype. 

- **Epitope**: A specific part of an antigen (usually a protein) that is recognized and bound by an antibody or T-cell receptor. It is often a short peptide or surface patch.

- **Equivariance (general)**: A function is equivariant to a transformation if applying the transformation to the input and then running the function yields the same result as running the function and then transforming the output.

- **Expressible**: A protein is said to be expressible if the sequence can be produced efficiently and stably in a host organism (e.g., E. coli or mammalian cells).

- **extracellular domain**: Cells are like soap bubbles — they have a membrane that separates the inside from the outside. Proteins that sit in the membrane (called membrane proteins) often have three parts: Extracellular domain — the part that sticks outside the cell, into the surrounding fluid (blood, tissue, etc.), Transmembrane domain — the part embedded in the cell membrane, and: Intracellular domain — the part inside the cell. The extracellular domain is the portion of a membrane protein that is exposed to the outside of the cell, and that other molecules (like binders) can access.


- **FAPE**: Instead of comparing the position of each atom in a predicted structure with its position in the true structure, which is a global comparison used by the metric RMSD, FAPE (Frame Aligned Point Error) does the following: it asks where atom B is in the predicted structure from the frame wof reference of a residue A, and then averages all pairs (B, A) usually within some max threshold distance. Here the frame of reference of residue A means the translation and rotation of residue A in the global coordinate system. Instead of asking “where is atom B globally?”, FAPE asks: “From residue A’s perspective, where should atom B be — and how different is that from where the model predicted it?” This encourages global coherence: all residues must agree on where other residues are. It provides rotation- and translation-invariant supervision.

- **Gene**: A section of DNA. DNA itself is a very long sequence of nucleotide base-pairs (A, G, T, C) structured as a double helix. A gene is a subsection of this sequence. The length of a gene is not fixed: there are short genes and long genes. Human DNA has between 20,000 and 25,000 genes. Genes encode information that produces proteins, which then perform most life functions and make up the physical structure of the body. Information from a given gene is 'transcribed' into mRNA by a molecule called the RNA Protease. This mRNA is a sequence of aminp acids, which then travels outside the nuclues, reaching the Ribosome, where it is then 'translated' by the ribosome into a protein. 

- **Gene expression**: The degree to which a gene in the DNA is turned on or off, thereby producing mRNA and thus proteins corresponding to it. A gene is turned on or off when certain specific molecules come and attach to the starting point of the gene, which either attracts or repels the RNA Polymerase enzyme to arrive at that point to begin transcribing the gene into mRNA. The gene expression level of genes is typically measured by measuring the amount of mRNA corresponding to each gene in a cell. In practice, we do not directly measure relative amounts of mRNA, but instead convert mRNA into the corresponding DNA fragements, via an enzyme called 'RNA reverse transcriptase', and then measure the relative abundance of the DNA fragments. The reason for this is that mRNA is fragile since it is single-stranded, compared to DNA which is double stranded. 

- **Gene-Gene Network**: a (directed) graph that encodes how genes influence one another's expression. 

- **Homologous templates**: In protein science, a "homologous template" refers to a protein structure that shares a similar sequence or structural features with another protein and is used as a reference or model in various studies, particularly in protein structure prediction and design. This concept is central to the field of comparative modeling, where the structure of an unknown protein (target protein) is inferred based on its similarity to one or more known protein structures (templates).

- **iPAE**: iPAE = interface pAE. It’s not a separate metric, but rather a subset of the full Predicted Aligned Error (pAE) matrix. iPAE is the portion of AlphaFold2’s pAE matrix that corresponds to residue pairs across different chains (i.e., at the protein–protein interface).

- **Immunotherapy**: A class of treatments, where the drug makes the human immune system to do something that it isn't otherwise doing, and thereby achieves disruption of a disease pathway. An example is the immunotherapy drug Keytruda, developed by Merck, for certain types of cancer (via a long chain of acquisitions). The Keytruda molecule  works by targeting the PD-1 protein on the surface of immune cells. It blocks PD-1 from binding with PD-L1, a protein on cancer cells that deactivates immune responses. This blocking action enables the immune system to detect and attack cancer cells which was otherwise evaded by the cancer.  

- **Inverse Folding**: Inverse folding is the problem of predicting the protein sequence corresponding to a given folded 3D structure of a protein. The forward folding problem (or simple 'the folding problem') is the problem of predicting the 3D folding structure given a sequence. 

- **LDDT**: Local Distance Difference Test. Suppose we have access to the ground truth 3d structure and the predicted structure. LDDT is a metric used to compare two protein structures. It answers: for a given residue i, how many of the distances to nearby residues j are close enough to the distances in the true structure? So: LDDT(i) = score for residue i averaged over many j. LDDT(i, j) = 1 if the predicted distance between i and j is close to the true distance (within some cutoff), otherwise 0 or a partial score. Formally, LDDT(i, j) compares the predictied distance $d_{ij}^{pred}$ with the true distance $d_{ij}^{true}$: LDDT(i, j) = mean over several deltas (1[|d_pred - d_true| < delta]). 


- **Ligand**: Any molecule that binds to a specific site on a target protein, often triggering a biological effect. Ligands include small molecules, ions, or other proteins.

- **Misfolding disease**: Protein misflding diseases are diseases caused by misfolded proteins (see 'Prion' below). A prominent example of such a disease is Alzheimer's Disease, although misfolding is also implicated in Type 2 Diabetes, affecting the islet cells of the Pancreas. Misfolding, aggregation and accumulation of diverse proteins in different organs is the hallmark in the group of protein misfolding disorders. Not only do misfolded proteins not perform their original function, they can interact with other proteins in toxic ways. A misfolded protein is called a prion. Misfolded proteins sometimes form an "amyloid" - aggregates of proteins characterized by a fibrillar, beta-sheet-rich structure. These amyloid fibrils are typically insoluble (properties like solubility can change if a protein folds differently) and can form deposits in tissues, which are associated with a variety of diseases, collectively known as amyloidosis. Amyloid fibrils are notable for their ability to increase in size by recruiting and converting more of the normal, soluble form of the protein into the misfolded amyloid form. Not all misfolding dsease involve amyloid fibrils - for example, cystic fibrosis is considered a protein misfolding disease because it results from misfolding of the CFTR protein, which leads to its malfunction and degradation but does not involve amyloid fibril formation.

- **Monoclonal Antibody (mAbs)**: are proteins made in a lab that can bind to specific targets in the body, such as antigens on cancer cells. They are a type of targeted drug therapy that mimic natural antibodies found in the blood. Each mAb is made to bind to only one antigen. An example is the immunotherapy drug Keytruda. They are called 'monoclonal' probably because they consist of a single type of antibody -- just like antibodies produced by all the clones of a single ancestor B-cell in the body. 

- **Motif-scaffolding**: The function of proteins is determined by the 3D structure. However, it is often a small part of the structure that plays an important role -- for e.g. binding to another protein - this part is called the _motif_, while the rest of the protein (called the _scaffolding_ that holds the motif in place) does not. Therefore, people have tried to design protein structures that would have the desired motif, with a scaffolding that isn't too important (as long as it doesn't interfere with other things, for example by binding to something else). 

- **mRNA**: A single strand sequence of amino acids synthesized by the 'RNA polymerase' enzyme by using a gene (a section of DNA) as an instruction template. Each sequence of 3 nucleotides in the gene (called a 'codon') encodes a single amino acid (this is a many-to-one mapping since 4^3 = 64 possible codons, but only 20 posisble amino acids). 

- **mRNA vaccine**: A type of vaccine that delivers mRNA to the human body which then presents the mRNA to ribosomes in cells that then translate the mRNA into proteins. The vaccine effectively uses mRNA as a means to generate a desired protein in the body. The protein is typically an antigen in the disease pathway that the vaccine is pretecting against. The body therefore gets time to produce antibodies against this antigen, so if the body in infected by the disease, it already has antibodies that would neutralize the antigen. The COVID19 vaccine is an example of an mRNA vaccine. The 2023 Nobel Price in Medicine was awared to Kaitlin Kariko and Drew Weissman for creating mRNA vaccines. 

- **MSA**: Multiple Sequence Alignment. Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) involves aligning three or more biological sequences (DNA, RNA, or proteins) to identify regions of similarity that may indicate functional, structural, or evolutionary relationships between the sequences. By comparing these sequences, MSA helps in identifying conserved sequence motifs, understanding phylogenetic relationships, and predicting the structure and function of newly discovered genes or proteins.

- **Non-immunogenic**: A designed protein is said to be non-immunogenic if it is less likely to trigger an immune response, an important consideration for therapeutic applications.

- **pAE**: stands for Predicted Aligned Error. It’s a matrix-valued prediction made by AlphaFold that tells you: “How much error do I expect in the relative position of residue i when aligned to residue j?” For every residue pair (i,j), AlphaFold predicts: "If I align the predicted structure of residue j with the true structure of residue j how far off will residue i's predicted position be from its true position?" The units are in angstroms — lower is better. The trained AlphaFold model outputs the predicted structure, pLDDT values one per residue, and the matrix valued pAE for each pair of residues. Both pLDDT and pAE were new predictive confidence metrics introduced by AlphaFold2 (2021).

- **Perplexity**: Perplexity is a metric borrowed by protein language memodels from from NLP. It ranges from 1 for a perfect model to 20 for a model that makes predictions at random since there are 20 possible equally likely amino acids. Intuitively, the perplexity describes the number of amino acids the model is choosing between for each prediction. Mathematically, perplexity is $$2^{-L}$$ where $$L$$ is the average log likelihood of a character or an amino acid position according to the model. 

- **pLDDT**:  Predicted Local Distance Difference Test is a per-residue confidence score produced by AlphaFold that is meant to numerically capture AlphaFold's confidence that this residue is in its correct location with respect to other residues in the 3D structure. It is not a comparison to ground truth — it’s a self-assessment by the model. Ranges from 0 to 100 for each residue. Details: internally, AlphaFold models the distribution of inter-residue distances for all pairs of residues, and uses this to estimate how “certain” it is about the local 3D position of each residue. pLDDT is an extension of LDDT which oes use the ground truth. Since we no longer have the ground truth, we replace the true distance $d_{ij}$ between two residues with AlphaFold's internal predicted distribution of this distance, with the mean of this distirbution serving as the predicted distribution, and then we take an expectation on the functional form of LDDT(i,j) in which true distance has been replaced by the internal predicted distribution of $d_{i,j}$. Since we are now comparing how far each portion of the distribution is to its own mean, the pLDDT will be high if the distribution is ihghly clustered/peaky, and low if it is diffuse. 

- **Post-translational modifications**: Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are chemical changes to a protein after its synthesis (translation) in a cell. These modifications can occur at various points in a protein's lifecycle and are essential for regulating its function, localization, and interaction with other cellular molecules. PTMs can influence a protein's activity, stability, and its role in signaling pathways, thereby playing a critical role in numerous biological processes and diseases.

- **Prion**: A prion is a misfolded protein that can induce misfolding of normal variants of the same protein and trigger cellular death. Prions cause prion diseases, which are neurodegenerative disorders. The word prion is derived from the term "proteinaceous infectious particle". Unlike other common infectious pathogens (bacteria, viruses), no DNA is involved. Most prions are twisted isoforms of the major prion protein (PrP), a natural protein whose normal function is uncertain. They are hypothesized as the cause of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs), including scrapie in sheep, chronic wasting disease (CWD) in deer, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle (mad cow disease), feline spongiform encephalopathy (FSE) in felines, and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) and fatal insomnia in humans.

 - **Protease**": A protease is a protein-cutting enzyme. Enzymes are often (but not always) proteins themselves that perform the role of a biological catalyst, i.e. enabling a chemical reaction without getting consumed in the process. The process of cutting up a protein involves breaking peptide bonds between amino acids, via 'hydrolosis', wherein the water moleccule attacks the peptide bond. A protease is often highly specific, i.e. it acts as a catalyst only at very specific boundaries between amino acids, position a water molecule and its catalytic triad to cause cleavage. Breaking a protein into amino acids is essential for many natural processes, for exmaple (1) to convert dietary proteins into amino acides that can then be reassmbled by the body into its own proteins. (2) during blood clotting, thrombin cleaves fibrinogen. 
 
- **Protein** : a large molecule (macromolecule) consisting of a variable length chain of 20 possible amino acids. Typical chain size is about 350, but can be more than 1000. Proteins have many different functions, that depend on their shape. For example, Haemoglobin is a protein that has a specific shape that allows oxygen molecules to bind to it. Insulin is also a protein. Most receptors are proteins. 

- **Protein covalent modifications**: this is a type of post-translational modification (see above). Covalent modifications specifically refer to changes where a chemical group is permanently bonded to the protein, which can significantly change the fnuction of the protein. This contrasts with non-covalent modifications, which involve interactions that do not form stable covalent bonds. A prominent example of a post-translational modification (PTM) that does not involve a covalent modification is the binding of metal ions to proteins, which can modulate protin structure, stability, and activity. For instance, calcium ions (Ca²⁺) commonly bind to proteins in a non-covalent manner, influencing processes like muscle contraction, neurotransmitter release, and enzyme activity. 

- **Protein design problem**: The task of creating a new protein (sequence and/or structure) that fulfills a specific function—e.g., binding a target, catalyzing a reaction, or displaying a desired fold.

- **Protein Language Model**: A protein LLM is a BERT-style (encoder-only) model that uses the masked language modeling objective to do self-supervised learning on protein sequences from a large dataset (e.g. all protein sequences in the PDB). At inference time, a new protein sequence is fed to the model and the model outputs a new sequence of vectors of the same length that is meant to represent the protein in representation space. This model can then be fine tuned for various downstream tasks such as protein classification or structure prediction. 

- **ProteinMPNN**: A model that takes as input a 3d structure of a protein and predicts the protein sequence that would fold into that structure. 

- **QSAR**: Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship, which simple refers to the quantitative modeling of structure and function of molecules and their interaction. Does not refer to a particular algorithm or model. For example, 3D protein-protein interactions can be termed a type of protein-protein QSAR. 

- **Receptor**: A molecule or part of a molecule, usually a protein, that another molecule binds or docks to. The molecule that binds to it is called the ligand. This binding interaction can enable a variety of cellular responses.  Essentially, receptors are the docking stations for ligands, enabling communication and processes within and between cells. A famous example of a receptor-ligand interaction is the insulin receptor and its ligand, insulin. Insulin is a hormone crucial for glucose metabolism. When insulin binds to its receptor on the cell surface, it triggers a cascade of events allowing cells to take up glucose from the bloodstream, which is vital for energy production and maintaining blood glucose levels.

- **Receissive**: A recessive disease is a genetic disorder that requires an individual to inherit two copies of a mutant gene, one from each parent, in order to manifest the disease. This means that each parent must be a carrier of the defective gene, possessing one mutant allele and one normal allele. The parents typically do not show symptoms of the disease themselves because they also have a normal copy of the gene, which is enough to maintain normal function. In recessive diseases, the disease traits do not appear unless an individual has two copies of the mutant gene. If an individual has one normal and one mutant allele, they are generally healthy but can pass the mutant gene to their offspring. These individuals are referred to as carriers. Examples of recessive diseases are: Cystic Fibrosis (which also happens to be the first diseases to be discovered to have a genetic basis, back in 1989), and sickle cell anemia. The opposite of receissive is 'dominant' (see 'dominant' above) 

- **Recombinant**: Recombinant refers to the technology used to create proteins by inserting the gene for the target protein into another organism, such as yeast or bacterial cells, which then produce the protein. This produced protein is used as the active ingredient in the vaccine to elicit an immune response without causing the disease, providing immunity against future infections.

- **Ribosome**: An 'organelle' in the cell outside the nucleus that does translation, i.e. conversion from mRNA to proteins. Ribosomes are protein-factories. 

- **RMSD**: RMSD stands for Root Mean Square Deviation. It is a commonly used measure of the average distance between the atoms (usually the backbone atoms) of superimposed proteins. In the context of protein structure prediction, RMSD is used to compare the spatial arrangement of atoms within a predicted protein structure to the known structure of the same protein (often derived from experimental data such as X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy). The first step in calculating RMSD is to align the predicted protein structure with the reference structure. This involves rotating and translating one of the structures (or both) to achieve the best possible superposition.

- **Scaffold Design**: Designing a protein backbone that stably holds a known functional motif (e.g., epitope, catalytic site) in a desired geometry.

- **Scaffold Hallucination**: Scaffold design using diffusion. 

- **scRNA data**: Single Cell RNA data. This means that the data was collected from a single cell, rather than from a multi cellular organism. The data itself consists of the relative quantitives of various RNA molecules, which are proportional to the degree to which the corresponding gene that created that RNA, is expressed. The data is typically normalized for gene length -- basically, longer genes have a greater chance of producing RNA because the the 'transcription factors' (some kind of molecules) that must attach to the DNA have a greater chance of doing so for genes that are longer. 

- **SE(3) Equivariance**: A model property meaning its outputs transform predictably under 3D rotations and translations of the input. Essential for respecting spatial geometry in proteins.

- **Self consistency**:  In Protein Design Pipelines such as: (RFDiffusion → ProteinMPNN → AlphaFold): You may define self-consistency of a design pipeline as: The sequence generated by ProteinMPNN for a backbone structure, when folded again by AlphaFold, returns to (or closely matches) the original structure used to design it. This checks: Was the designed sequence actually compatible with the intended structure? This is often called a "roundtrip check" or structure self-consistency check. See also "designability" elsewhere in this glossary. Note that this is not absolute proof that the protein sequence is correct or good. Self consistency is a necessary condition but not a sufficient condition. Both ProteinMPNN and AlphaFold are trained on PDB data so it is possible that they make similar errors. That is, it could be that the erroneous protein sequence created by proteinMPNN is also erroneously mapped back to the same or very similar 3D structure by AlphaFold as the one that was used as input to proteinMPNN? 

- **Sequence recovery**: Sequence recovery measures the percentage of amino acids in the designed sequence that are identical to those in the original sequence at each corresponding position. It is expressed as a percentage and is used to assess how well the design process retains the original protein's characteristics. 

- **Single cell Transcriptomics**: the study of gene expression profiles of individual cells (as opposed to a large number of cells, which would mix the distrbutions of the collected data). This technique allows researchers to measure the RNA (transcriptome) present in a single cell, providing a detailed view of cellular function and behavior at an unprecedented resolution. The advent of single-cell transcriptomics has revolutionized our understanding of cellular diversity, differentiation processes, and disease mechanisms. scRNA data is what is used in papers like UCE (universal cell embeddings), csGPT and Geneformer (see the papers page).

- **SMILES**: A string representation of molecules, typically used for small molecules

- **SolubleMPNN:** A variant or extension of ProteinMPNN trained or fine-tuned to generate protein sequences that are soluble, i.e., more likely to be well-expressed and not aggregate in aqueous environments.

- **Terminus N and C**: The N terminus is the starting point of a protein or peptide chain and the C temrinus is the end point. 

- **TM score**: The TM score (Template Modeling score) is a measure used in structural biology to assess the similarity between protein structures. It is scaled between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates a perfect match between two structures. The TM score is particularly useful because it is less sensitive to local variations in structure and more focused on the overall topology, making it robust for comparing larger structural deviations. This metric provides a normalized measure of structural similarity, useful in evaluating the accuracy of predicted protein structures against known structures. TM-score measures the overall structural similarity between two protein structures, normalized to protein length. It’s designed to overcome the limitations of RMSD. Global fold similarity, not just atom-by-atom deviation. Length-normalized and robust to local errors. TM-score > 0.5 typically indicates correct fold. TM-score ~1 means perfect match. Can be hard to interpret in terms of absolute distances

- **Transcriptome**: The "transcriptome" refers to the entire set of RNA molecules, including messenger RNA (mRNA), ribosomal RNA (rRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and other non-coding RNAs, produced by the genome in one cell or a population of cells under specific circumstances or conditions. The transcriptome provides a comprehensive snapshot of all the genes that are actively being transcribed and thus expressed at any given moment.

 
- **Viral Epitope**: A short surface-exposed part of a virus protein (e.g., spike protein in SARS-CoV-2) that is recognized by the immune system. Typically the region that antibodies bind to. Often consists of a loop or patch with a known shape.

